# The Population sector

##  Summary
We describe the Population sector of the Earth4All model, by referring to the Population view of the Vensim model implementation.

##  Four-level population model
The population is decomposed into four age groups: ages 0-20, ages 20-40, ages 40-60, and ages greater than 60. The total population is the sum of these four age levels.

$$\mathtt{POP}(t) = \mathtt{A0020}(t)+\mathtt{A2040}(t)+\mathtt{A4060}(t)+\mathtt{A60PL}(t)$$

The 0-20 age group is increased by the number of births and decreased by the maturation of 20-year-olds `PASS20` into the next age group. The other age level dynamics are formulated similarly, except that they are increased by the maturation from the level below, rather than by births, and that the last age group is decreased by the number of deaths. These dynamics are formalized in the following four differential equations.

$$\frac{\mathrm{d}}{\mathrm{d}t}\mathtt{A0020}(t) = \mathtt{BIRTHS}(t)-\mathtt{PASS20}(t)$$

$$\frac{\mathrm{d}}{\mathrm{d}t}\mathtt{A2040}(t) = \mathtt{PASS20}(t)-\mathtt{PASS40}(t)$$

$$\frac{\mathrm{d}}{\mathrm{d}t}\mathtt{A4060}(t) = \mathtt{PASS40}(t)-\mathtt{PASS60}(t)$$

$$\frac{\mathrm{d}}{\mathrm{d}t}\mathtt{A60PL}(t) = \mathtt{PASS60}(t)-\mathtt{DEATHS}(t)$$

The initial value of the four population levels is set at $2170$, $1100$, $768$, and $382$ millions, respectively, which are the estimated number of people in each level in the world in 1980.
**Source to be added.**

Note that the number of deaths in the three groups of ages 0-20, 20-40, and 40-60 are not explicitly included in the model. According to the authors of the model itself, the deaths before 60 have been dropped, because they are small relative to all the other inaccuracies in the model and, hence, insignificant relative to what is the message of the model. There is a 100-age group 10-region version of the E4A model (developed by Ulrich Goluke) which includes them, so that it should be possible to know what difference it makes. 

###  Passing and deaths equations

The number of passing and of deaths per year is expressed as a delay function of the total number of persons in the previous  population level (where the previous population level of the group of ages 0-20 is the births, and the previous population level of the deaths is the group of ages greater than 60). The delay for the passing functions is equal to 20 (since there is a gap of 20 years between one group and the next one), while the delay for the deaths function is the average life expectancy at age 60 (which varies over time). In all cases, the order of the delay is set equal to 10 (that is, there is a gap of at least two years between one sub-group and the next one). In other words, we have that, for example, $\mathtt{PASS20} = \mathrm{DELAY\ N}(\mathtt{BIRTHS}, 20, 2170, 10)$. By referring to the technical note [[Implementing DELAY N]], we then have the following set of equations.

$$
\left\{\begin{array}{ll}
\frac{\mathrm{d}}{\mathrm{d}t} \mathtt{LV\_{PASS20}}(t)[1] = \mathtt{BIRTHS}(t)-\mathtt{RT\_{PASS20}}(t)[1] & \\
\frac{\mathrm{d}}{\mathrm{d}t} \mathtt{LV\_{PASS20}}(t)[i] = \mathtt{RT\_{PASS20}}(t)[i-1]-\mathtt{RT\_{PASS20}}(t)[i] & 2\leq i\leq10\\
\mathtt{RT\_{PASS20}}(t)[i] = 0.5\mathtt{LV\_{PASS20}}(t)[i] & 1\leq i\leq10\\
\mathtt{PASS20}(t) = \mathtt{RT\_{PASS20}}(t)[10] &
\end{array}
\right.
$$

$$
\left\{\begin{array}{ll}
\frac{\mathrm{d}}{\mathrm{d}t} \mathtt{LV\_{PASS40}}(t)[1] = \mathtt{PASS20}(t)-\mathtt{RT\_{PASS40}}(t)[1] & \\
\frac{\mathrm{d}}{\mathrm{d}t} \mathtt{LV\_{PASS40}}(t)[i] = \mathtt{RT\_{PASS40}}(t)[i-1]-\mathtt{RT\_{PASS40}}(t)[i] & 2\leq i\leq10\\
\mathtt{RT\_{PASS40}}(t)[i] = 0.5\mathtt{LV\_{PASS40}(t)}[i] & 1\leq i\leq10\\
\mathtt{PASS40}(t) = \mathtt{RT\_{PASS40}}(t)[10] &
\end{array}
\right.
$$

$$
\left\{\begin{array}{ll}
\frac{\mathrm{d}}{\mathrm{d}t} \mathtt{LV\_{PASS60}}(t)[1] = \mathtt{PASS40}(t)-\mathtt{RT\_{PASS60}}(t)[1]+ & \\
\frac{\mathrm{d}}{\mathrm{d}t} \mathtt{LV\_{PASS60}}(t)[i] = \mathtt{RT\_{PASS60}}(t)[i-1]-\mathtt{RT\_{PASS60}}(t)[i] & 2\leq i\leq10\\
\mathtt{RT\_{PASS60}}(t)[i] = 0.5\mathtt{LV\_{PASS60}(t)}[i] & 1\leq i\leq10\\
\mathtt{PASS60}(t) = \mathtt{RT\_{PASS60}}(t)[10] &
\end{array}
\right.
$$

$$
\left\{\begin{array}{ll}
\frac{\mathrm{d}}{\mathrm{d}t} \mathtt{LV\_DEATHS}(t)[1] = \mathtt{PASS60}(t)-\mathtt{RT\_DEATHS}(t)[1] & \\
\frac{\mathrm{d}}{\mathrm{d}t} \mathtt{LV\_DEATHS}(t)[i] = \mathtt{RT\_DEATHS}(t)[i-1]-\mathtt{RT\_DEATHS}(t)[i] & 2\leq i\leq10\\
\mathtt{RT\_DEATHS}(t)[i] = \frac{10}{\mathtt{LE60}(t)} \mathtt{LV\_DEATHS(t)}[i] & 1\leq i\leq10\\
\mathtt{DEATHS}(t) = \mathtt{RT\_DEATHS}(t)[10] &
\end{array}
\right.
$$

Indeed, these equations can be generated by the following four invocation of the `delay_n` function described in the technical note [[Implementing DELAY N]].

```
delay_n!(eqs, BIRTHS, RT_PASS20, LV_PASS20, 20, 10)
delay_n!(eqs, PASS20, RT_PASS40, LV_PASS40, 20, 10)
delay_n!(eqs, PASS40, RT_PASS60, LV_PASS60, 20, 10)
delay_n!(eqs, PASS60, RT_DEATHS, LV_DEATHS, LE60, 10)
```

Note that in the first three invocations the delay is equal to 20, while in the last invocation the delay is equal to `LE60` (for this reason, in the first three groups of equations we have that each RT function is equal to $\frac{10}{20}=0.5$ multiplied by the corresponding LV function, while in the last group of equations we have that each RT function is equal to $\frac{10}{\mathtt{LE60}(t)}$ multiplied by the corresponding LV function.

From the number of deaths and the population size, we can derive the death rate by using the following equation.

$$\mathtt{DEATHR}(t) = \frac{\mathtt{DEATHS}(t)}{\mathtt{POP}(t)}$$

###  Births equations

The number of births depends on the number of women in the group of ages 20-40, by the observed fertility, and by the length of the fertility period of each woman. In the model, the authors assume that half of the population are women, and that the fertile period is 20 years. Hence, we have the following equation.

$$\mathtt{BIRTHS}(t) = \frac{\mathtt{FW}\cdot\mathtt{A2040}(t)\cdot\mathtt{OF}(t)}{\mathtt{FP}}$$
In the equation, $\mathtt{FW}$ is a parameter equal to $0.5$ and $\mathtt{FP}$ is a parameter equal to $20$. The function $\mathtt{OF}$ is instead computed by referring to the desired number of children as follows.

$$\mathtt{OF}(t) = \mathtt{FADFS}\cdot\mathtt{DNC}(t)$$
The parameter $\mathtt{FADFS}$, which is equal to $0.8$, denotes the fraction of women achieving the desired family size (determined by the value of the function $\mathtt{DNC}$.

## The Population sector endogenous variables

In the following list, only the initial values that cannot be implicitly computed within the sector are indicated (these values are taken from either the functions or the tables of Vensim). Note that this is the only sector in which the `DELAY N` function is used: for this, reason, the following list also includes the `LV` and `RT` functions corresponding to the four usages of the `DELAY N` function (see the technical note on [[Implementing DELAY N]]).

| Vensim name | Name | Initial value |
| --- | --- | --- |
| Aged 0-20 years Mp | `A0020` | 2170.0 |
| Aged 20-40 years Mp | `A2040` | 1100.0 |
| Aged 20-Pension Age Mp | `A20PA` |  |
| Aged 40-60 years Mp | `A4060` | 768.0 |
| Aged 60+ in 1980 Mp | `A60PL` | 382.0 |
| Birth Rate 1/y | `BIRTHR` |  |
| Births Mp/y | `BIRTHS` |  |
| Cost of Extra Fertility Reduction (share of GDP) | `CEFR` |  |
| Death Rate 1/y | `DEATHR` |  |
| Deaths Mp/y | `DEATHS` |  |
| Dependency Ratio p/p | `DR` |  |
| Desired No of Children | `DNC` |  |
| Effective GDP per Person kDollar/p/y | `EGDPP` | 6.4 |
| Extra Fertility Reduction | `EFR` |  |
| Extra Pension Age y | `EPA` | 0.0 |
| Fertility Multiplier | `FM` |  |
| GDP per Person kDollar/p/y | `GDPP` |  |
| LE at 60 y | `LE60` |  |
| LIfe EXpectancy Multiplier | `LIEXM` |  |
| Life Expectancy y | `LE` | 67.0 |
| LV functions for deaths Mp/y | `(LV_DEATHS)`[10] | 21.0 |
| LV functions for passing 20 Mp/y | `(LV_PASS20)`[10] | 200.0 |
| LV functions for passing 40 Mp/y | `(LV_PASS40)`[10] | 128.0 |
| LV functions for passing 60 Mp/y | `(LV_PASS60)`[10] | 76.0 |
| Observed Fertility | `OF` |  |
| On Pension Mp | `OP` |  |
| Passing 20 Mp/y | `PASS20` |  |
| Passing 40 Mp/y | `PASS40` | 64.0 |
| Passing 60 Mp/y | `PASS60` | 38.0 |
| Pension Age y | `PA` | 62.0 |
| Pensioners per Worker p/p | `PW` |  |
| Population Growth Rate Mp | `PGR` |  |
| Population Mp | `POP` |  |
| RT functions for deaths Mp/y | `(RT_DEATHS)`[10] | 21.0 |
| RT functions for passing 20 Mp/y | `(RT_PASS20)`[10] | 200.0 |
| RT functions for passing 40 Mp/y | `(RT_PASS40)`[10] | 128.0 |
| RT functions for passing 60 Mp/y | `(RT_PASS60)`[10] | 76.0 |
| Warming Effect on Life Expectancy | `WELE` |  |

## The Population sector parameters

| Vensim name | Name | Value |
| --- | --- | --- |
| Cost of Max Fertility Reduction (share of GDP) | `CMFR` | 0.01 |
| DNC in 1980 | `DNC80` | 4.3 |
| DNCalfa<0 | `DNCA` | 0.0 |
| DNCgamma | `DNCG` | 0.14 |
| DNCmin | `DNCM` | 1.2 |
| Fertile Period | `FP` | 20.0 |
| Fraction Achieving Desired Family Size | `FADFS` | 0.8 |
| Fraction Women | `FW` | 0.5 |
| Goal for Extra Fertility Reduction | `GEFR` | 0.2 |
| Goal for Extra Pension Age y | `GEPA` | 0.0 |
| LEalfa | `LEA` | 0.001 |
| LEgamma | `LEG` | 0.15 |
| LEmax | `LEMAX` | 85.0 |
| Max Fertility Multiplier | `MFM` | 1.6 |
| Max Life Expectancy Multiplier | `MLEM` | 1.1 |
| Observed Warming in 2022 deg C | `OW2022` | 1.35 |
| sLEeoPa>0: Life Expectancy Effect on Pension Age | `LEEPA` | 0.75 |
| sOWeoLE<0: Observed Warming Effect on Life Expectancy | `OWELE` | -0.02 |
| SSP2 Family Action from 2022 Flag | `SSP2FA2022F` | 1.0 |
| Time to adapt to higher income y | `TAHI` | 10.0 |

## The Population sector exogenous variables

| Vensim name | Name | Original sector |
| --- | --- | --- |
| GDP GDollar/y | `GDP` | Inventory |
| Introduction Period for Policy y | `IPP` | Wellbeing |
| OBserved WArming deg C | `OBWA` | Climate |